.TH CEDILLA 1
.SH NAME
cedilla \- a best-effort text printer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cedilla
.RB [ \-fs
.IR fontset ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR papersize ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR size ]
.RB [ \-bs
.IR baselineskip ]
.RB [ \- w ]
.RB [ \-h
.IR header ]
.RB [ \-hb
.IR header\-baseline ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR footer ]
.RB [ \-fb
.IR footer\-baseline ]
infile 
.RI [ outfile ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Cedilla
is a text printer that uses Unicode internally and will make heroic
efforts to find or design suitable glyphs for exotic or rare characters.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.BI \-fs " fontset"
Use the list of fonts specified by
.IR fontset .
The set of available fontsets is listed in the file
.BR /etc/cedilla\-config.lisp .
.TP 8
.BI \-p " papersize"
Use the paper size specified by
.I papersize
(default
.BR A4 ).
The set of available paper sizes is listed in the file
.BR /etc/cedilla\-config.lisp .
.TP 8
.BI \-s " size"
Set the font size to
.I size
points
(default 11).
.TP 8
.BI \-bs " baselineskip"
Separate lines by
.I baselineskip
(by default, equal to 
.IR size ).
.TP 8
.BI \-w
Enable line wrapping.
.TP 8
.BI \-h " header"
Set the header format to 
.IR header .
See HEADER AND FOOTER FORMATS below.
.TP 8
.BI \-hb " header\-baseline"
Set the header's baseline to be at a distance of
.I header-baseline
(default 1cm)
of the top of the page.  The argument must be a number in points.
.TP 8
.BI \-f " footer"
Set the footer format to 
.IR header .
See HEADER AND FOOTER FORMATS below.
.TP 8
.BI \-fb " footer\-baseline"
Set the footer's baseline to be at a distance of
.I header\-baseline
of the top of the page.
.TP 8
.B \-v
Be verbose about unprintable characters.
.TP 8
.B \-l
List all glyphs known to Cedilla in the current fontset.
.TP 8
.B \-V
Display the version of Cedilla and exit.
.TP 8
.B \-?
Print a short help message and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP 5
.B /etc/cedilla\-config.lisp
the system\-wide configuration file for
.BR Cedilla .
.SH HEADER AND FOOTER FORMAT
The format passed to the
.B \-h
and
.B \-f
options is of the form
.TP 8
.RI [ left ,] center [, right ]
where 
.IR left ,
.I center
and
.I right
are strings that may contain any of the following sequences:
.TP 8
.BR %% " typeset a percent sign"
.TP 8
.BR %, " typeset a comma"
.TP 8
.BR %p " typeset the page number as an Arabic number"
.TP 8
.BR %P " typeset the page number in words"
.TP 8
.BR %r " typeset the page number as a small Roman number"
.TP 8
.BR %R " typeset the page number as a Roman number"
.SH NOTES
By design,
.B Cedilla
only accepts input data in UTF\-8.  You are expected to use an external
converter such as 
.BR iconv (1)
or
.BR luit (1)
in order to print text encoded in a legacy encoding.
.B Cedilla
is unable to print data that comes from a pipe; this is unavoidable,
as
.B Cedilla
makes two passes over its input file.
.SH AUTHOR
.B Cedilla
was written by Juliusz Chroboczek <jch@pps.jussieu.fr>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR iconv (1),
.BR luit (1),
.BR a2ps (1),
.BR enscript (1),
.BR ogonkify (1),
.BR lpr (1).
